---
learningObjectiveId: "021.03.02.02"
parentId: "021.03.02"
title: "System components: design, operation, degraded modes of operation,
  indications and warnings"
---

### Components

#### Reservoir

The reservoir is a tank in which an adequate supply of fluid for the system is
stored.

#### Accumulator

The accumulator is a steel sphere divided into two chambers by a synthetic
rubber diaphragm. The upper chamber contains fluid at system pressure, while the
lower chamber is charged with nitrogen or air. Cylindrical types are also used
in high pressure hydraulic systems.

Many aircraft have several accumulators in the hydraulic system. There may be a
main system accumulator and an emergency system accumulator. There may also be
auxiliary accumulators located in various sub-systems.

The function of an accumulator is to:

- Dampen pressure surges in the hydraulic system caused by actuation of a unit
  and the effort of the pump to maintain pressure at a preset level.
- Aid or supplement the power pump when several units are operating at once by
  supplying extra power from its accumulated, or stored, power.
- Store power for the limited operation of a hydraulic unit when the pump is not
  operating.
- Supply fluid under pressure to compensate for small internal or external (not
  desired) leaks that would cause the system to cycle continuously by action of
  the pressure switches continually kicking in.

#### Piston actuator

An actuating cylinder that transforms energy in the form of fluid pressure into
mechanical force, or action, to perform work. It is used to impart powered
linear motion to some movable object or mechanism.

#### Filter

A filter is a screening or straining device used to clean the hydraulic fluid,
preventing foreign particles and contaminating substances from remaining in the
system.

If such objectionable material were not removed, the entire hydraulic system of
the aircraft could fail through the breakdown or malfunctioning of a single unit
of the system.

#### Filter Bypass Valve

Filter modules are often equipped with a bypass relief valve. The bypass relief
valve opens if the filter clogs, permitting continued hydraulic flow and
operation of aircraft systems. Dirty oil is preferred over no flow at all.
Figure 12-18 shows the principle of operation of a filter bypass valve. The ball
valve opens when the filter becomes clogged and the pressure over the filter
increases.

#### Non return check valve

A hydraulic or pneumatic system component that allows full flow of fluid in one
direction but blocks all flow in the opposite direction.

#### Shuttle Valve

In certain fluid power systems, the supply of fluid to a subsystem must be from
more than one source to meet system requirements.

In some systems, an emergency system is provided as a source of pressure in the
event of normal system failure. The emergency system usually actuates only
essential components.

The main purpose of the shuttle valve is to isolate the normal system from an
alternate or emergency system. It is small and simple; yet, it is a very
important component.

#### Pressure relief valve

Hydraulic pressure must be regulated in order to use it to perform the desired
tasks. A pressure relief valve is used to limit the amount of pressure being
exerted on a confined liquid. This is necessary to prevent failure of components
or rupture of hydraulic lines under excessive pressures. The pressure relief
valve is, in effect, a system safety valve.

#### Restrictor valve

A fluid power system component that controls the rate of actuator movement by
restricting the flow of fluid into or out of the actuator.

#### Priority valve

A priority valve gives priority to the critical hydraulic subsystems over
non-critical systems when system pressure is low. For instance, if the pressure
of the priority valve is set for 2,200 psi, all systems receive pressure when
the pressure is above 2,200 psi. If the pressure drops below 2,200 psi, the
priority valve closes, and no fluid pressure flows to the non-critical systems.

#### Selector Valve

A selector valve is used to control the direction of movement of a hydraulic
actuating cylinder or similar device. It provides for the simultaneous flow of
hydraulic fluid both into and out of the unit. Hydraulic system pressure can be
routed with the selector valve to operate the unit in either direction and a
corresponding return path for the fluid to the reservoir is provided. There are
two main types of selector valves: open-center and closed-center. An open center
valve allows a continuous flow of system hydraulic fluid through the valve even
when the selector is not in a position to actuate a unit. A closed-center
selector valve blocks the flow of fluid through the valve when it is in the
NEUTRAL or OFF position.

#### Fire shut-off valve

Hydraulic shut off valves are usually installed at the engine firewall. In the
event of an engine fire, the shut-off valve is closed to prevent possible
ignition of the hydraulic fluid.

#### Hydraulic Fuses

A type of flow control valve that allows a normal flow of fluid in the system
but, if the flow rate is excessive, or if too much fluid flows for normal
operation, the fuse will shut off all further flow.

#### Pressure Return Pipes

Pipes that connect "used" hydraulic fluid back to the reservoir.

[Source: Faa H-8083-31A Vol 2, Chapter 12](https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/handbooks_manuals/aviation/media/amt_airframe_hb_vol_2.pdf)
