---
learningObjectiveId: 021.11.04.01
title: General
---

```tsx eval
<LearningOBjectives learningObjectiveId={021.11.04.01} />
```

## Summary

### Engine Ratings

Take off

Go around

Maximum continuos power / thrust

maximum climb power / thrust

### Spool up

### Flight Idle and Ground Idle.

Turbine engines reaction times can be quite slow as the turbine and compressor
have to accelerate to obtain the power level requested when moving the power
lever. The slowest response time happens when the engine is on idle, and the
absolute worst scenario is increasing from idle to full power.

Because of this, flight idle power is significantly higher than ground idle
power; So that Go around power can be obtain with minimum delay. Ground power
idle is usually the minimum power required to maintain engine combustion.

### Alpha Range vs Beta Range and Reverse Thrust

Some turbo propellers have two operating ranges for their engines. An **alpha
range** intended for flight, and a **beta range** intended for ground
operations.

Inside the **alpha range** engine operation is as you would expect from a
Constant Speed propeller aircraft: The Engine Power is controlled by the Power
lever, and the propeller RPM by the Pitch Lever.

When decreasing the power below idle power, the **beta range** is entered. Here,
the power lever controls blade pitch directly, and Torque is kept at Idle. When
landing, the pitch angle of the blades will be smaller than the angle of
incoming air, effectively giving the propeller a negative angle of attack,
resulting in reverse thrust being generated.

In some aircraft it's possible to decrease the blade pitch onto negative angles
to produce **reverse thrust** that can be used to move the aircraft backwards.
In this regime, the power lever controls both pitch angle and power lever

Needless to say, entering the beta range in flight conditions is a terrible idea
;).

In Summary:

|         | Power lever                                    | Prop Lever        | Torque   | Thrust             |
| ------- | ---------------------------------------------- | ----------------- | -------- | ------------------ |
| Alpha   | Controls Engine Torque                         | Controls prop RPM | Positive | Positive           |
| Beta    | Controls Prop Pitch                            | ---               | IDLE     | Postive / negative |
| Reverse | Controls Negative Prop Pitch and Engine Torque | ---               | Positive | Negative           |

[Source](https://skybrary.aero/articles/beta-range)
[Source](https://skybrary.aero/articles/alpha-range)

### Monitoring instruments of an engine.

### Exhaust Gas temperature (EGT)

EGT is a critical parameter that, in normal conditions, correlates directly with
engine power. The higher the power setting, the higher the EGT. EGT is typically
measured on the HP turbine outlet.

### Engine Pressure Ratio (EPR)

Ratio of pressure of the turbine output / pressure of the compressor input.
Effectively indicates the thrust of a turbofan engine.

### N1

Shows RPM of the fan and low pressure compressor. Effectively, indicates the
thrust of a turbofan engine.

### N2

### Vibration sensors

used to detect imbalance of one or both of the spools. These imbalances are
usually a sign of damage in the compressor or turbine blades which tend to
develop rapidly into a critical failure.

### Engine Trending

Engine Trend Analysis is a method of assessing the health of an engine over
time. This allows to enhance maintenance planning and detect anomalies. For
example, An engine operating limits may set the normal operating range of oil
temperatures between 65ยบ and 95ยบ, but when monitoring the trend of a specific
engine it is verified the normal operating engine is below 70ยบ over 99.5% of the
time. in this scenario an operating speed of 75ยบ may be sufficient to trigger an
investigation of engine condition since despite being within limits, something
may be off.
